
# Turn Right ❯ into the nowness

## Topological Space

The spectacle mutates itself through production of spaces, constructing and re-constructing spectacular again and again in an endless twist. A wicked process that brands fresh products, the same as neighboring ancients with small alteration of attaching the letter "A",<sup>[1](#c1)</sup> that represents a present "haunted by the ghosts of lost futures".<sup>[2](#c2)</sup> The construction as a recipe to fix a future that is already expired. An era that seemingly dwells through renderings. It's not so hard to feel the desperate effort of the fabric to look alike architect's deceptious imagination. 

A fabrication that not only animates the ideals on a surface, but incorporates a manifold of material and labor. An excavation that reveals a topological space under continuous deformations; stretching, twisting, crumpling, and bending land, and water. Water becomes the captive of the master's plan, committed to distract and entertain spectators, from the temporality of the transformation. A muddy water indeed, that not only blurs the liminality of the space, but also makes it possible for the opportunist to fish in.

## Construction Site

Committed to formal repetition and patterns of living, the flowchart replaced the missing language of modern architecture that recursively appeared as *program* to Summerson.<sup>[3](#c3)</sup> Consequently, Computer-Aided Design or CAD software as a reproductive tool for the flowchart—by courtesy of progress in computer science and algorithmic ramifications—outgrew the boundaries of non-specialist comprehension and offered various interfaces for architects to design and think with. In this context, hiding its syntactic architecture from the designers, CAD and modeling software lay out a wide range of tools for architectural practitioners to construct within a three-dimensional space. A maker and world-maker, modifier and modified dualistic space that subjects the architecture to the architect through an algorithmic reductivism. Is it possible to detoxicate from this contagious dualism? To exercise an emancipatory perspective, we might evaluate this dualistic space through two sets of spatial notions; surface operation and navigation.

Wide use of 3D modeling software in architecture due to their specific algorithm and economic model entails a specific situatedness that can be traced back in the built environment through many spaces that we design as architects. Since their introduction in the 1960s, CAD Software have been developing into agents creating and modifying curves and surfaces that are not for mere representations, but providing a set of information for constructing material bodies. An ecosystem rooted in modern technological achievement of aircraft and automotive industries in the field of three-dimensional surface construction.<sup>[4](#c4)</sup>

The invention of CAD is attributed to the French engineer Pierre Bezier who conducted a mathematical work regarding parametric curves and surface based on Bernstein polynomial during late sixties (UNISURF),<sup>[5](#c5)</sup> and an earlier software with a graphical interface for drafting (SKETCHPAD) introduced by Ivan Sutherland at MIT as the ancestors of modern CAD software.<sup>[6](#c6)</sup> It is important to mention that the initial intention of such software was not to help the designer to think and imagine with, but precisely reproduce drawings that were necessary for machine communication hence fabrication and construction.<sup>[7](#c7)</sup>

Nevertheless, after so many years of a shared agency, it is impossible to detach the algorithmically engendered modes of imagination from the minds and the hands of designers. Then again, three-dimensional modeling software have been administrating construction sites for the ones who dreamed of building what they imagine. An imagination that is entangled with the methods of surface construction and spatial navigation that a particular software is offering. The same is with my own experiences with SketchUp as the sprawling software of the years I studies and practices architecture and urban design for about a decade in Turkey from 2009 to 2018. I grew up with it while witnessing its expansion from a naive enterprise to a contagious patent. With it, I stayed up all night, dreamed, inhaled, swallowed, had dreams, and got lost in details.

As SketchUp was getting more popular, the architectural designs produced in schools, the ones which were winning prizes in competitions, and even proposed by many practicing architects were becoming as plain, simplistic, rudimentary cubic forms as the software could do the best. All isomorphism of a space that one may call as *SketchUp architecture*. An architectural homotopy, resulting from its simplistic functions and effortless constructions methodologies. It is somewhat hard to ignore the reductivism bursting out from every corner of its patented invention registered by its far-sighted patron *Google*.<sup>[8](#c8)</sup>

Under the name of "intuition" this benefit-oriented document made an analogy between sketching with pen and paper to three-dimensional modeling.<sup>[9](#c9)</sup> Is it possible to simply compare the flat surface of a paper and pen with its specific sensory dynamics to a mathematical three-dimensional representational space with topological aspects to it such as faces and vertices? Another reduction was related to the knowledge once necessary for the human that constructed the algorithm in the first place. A continuous transformation from the former scientist to the later "non-technical user".<sup>[10](#c10)</sup> A reduction that by praising "non-precise modifications" positioned engineers and architects at the center of the user-centered spectrum, subjecting them to conceptualize, model, hence build rapidly. An intended product of the protected invention that manifested itself precisely in the rapid constructions of building blocks back then in Turkey.<sup>[11](#c11)</sup> 

As a software, SketchUp does not only inherit a soft regime by favor of topological space that incorporates surface operations and navigation,<sup>[12](#c12)</sup> but also an interrelated hard regime that operates in specific geographic locations more rigorously.<sup>[13](#c13)</sup> In countries such as Turkey, where I studied and practiced architecture, neoliberalist urban development is hand in hand with rapid constructions, shorter design periods, and brutal enforcement of urban renewal. A software such as SketchUp with its lower costs of acquiring and operating becomes the golden preference of modeling software within the conventional drafting ecosystem.<sup>[14](#c14)</sup> It produces the most efficient result in kitschy renderings of mediocre architecture of repetition. Here is the aesthetical regime of this software as product of an imprudent dependency, backed by algorithmic addiction (through reductivism construction) and the patent economy.<sup>[15](#c15)</sup>

But how does this soft regime of SketchUp function as an apparatus that resonates from myself to the other architects of my generation, from urban transformation to production of space, and from ubiquitous architecture to material and labor? A regime that operates through continues functions that reduces the space of world-making to a dualism of world and world-maker. A reduction that hinders designer from an inference that he might be a product of an economic regime that constitutes the software in the first place. That such a model and its agency is not shared with the architect but mimicked. To understand those functions and their effects, we might investigate their containing topology by virtue of surface operations and navigation.

### Surface operations

Unlike a 3D model that is static, modeling is a process that involves temporality and methodology, thus thinking. Particularly, where modeling process operates through topological operations that translates into creating and modifying surfaces in a three-dimensional space, the designer may encounter a particular situatedness that entails an illusion of physical materiality. Considering proliferation of this illusion backed by a pure dualistic fantasy of full control over the object, it becomes crucial to understand what kind of abstractions take place in the process of creating and modifying objects. Objects that are composed of flat polygonal faces, edges, and vertices [rendering surfaces].

***Pencil and paper > drawing > drawing aids > closed polygon > Push/Pull***

Similar to effortless multiplications, a reductive translations between material and immaterial,<sup>[16](#c16)</sup> deteriorates that illusion and it entangled dualism. In the name of intuition, SketchUp oversimplifies this translation through mundane analogies borrowed from material space. A pencil icon for the line tool by which after drawing (simply create line with start and end points) one may use an eraser to delete. What happened to the stroke of a pencil and adherences of its core material on a paper? What about the uneven and broken scribbles by the agency of the hand and its frictional movement on the paper? Nevertheless, SketchUp's pencil can only "draw" straight lines.

Lines that in SketchUp's rudimentary space in the name of "drawing aids" are being forced to get parallel to some "invented" color-coded axis.<sup>[17](#c17)</sup> A situation that unveils the software's desperation in escaping from mathematical notions such as Cartesian coordinate system and its abstractions (X,Y,Z). Quick fix: appropriating red, green and blue as a hideout in the name of low-precision conceptual tool. How can a so-called CAD software praise non-precision where every vertex of its lines and faces (objects) has a precise spatial location (coordinates)? Just by assigning a pencil icon to its line tool? A tool that is obliged to construct (calculate) any lines with a start and an end point.

***Denial of NURBs while oversimplifying polygonal/mesh modeling***

When it comes to Freehand drawing or even curves such as circles or arcs, SketchUp discloses its reductivist exploitation. As it refuses to employ Bézier curves (splines) and surfaces based on control points,<sup>[18](#c18)</sup> the existence (hence construction) of the objects shrinks to polygonal chains (composed of straight line segments) and polygonal planar surfaces.<sup>[19](#c19)</sup> This rejection of calculability hence complexity, in spite of computation possibilities, results in a denial of possible constructable spaces. A denial that reduces a manifold of already existing CAD modifiers such as extrusion and offset to a single tool so called Push/Pull.<sup>[20](#c20)</sup> A modifier that only works with a limited planar surface and its extrusion only towards its *normals*. Assigning a box and an arrow on top as its icon, this allegorically named tool precisely represents the software's agenda in sustaining cubic volumes over physical bodies, hence surface over territory.

### Navigation

Another technique that SketchUp conducts which reinforces forementioned dualistic space of world-maker and world, concerns the notion of navigation. This is precisely connected to the software's choice in offering a single *viewport* over conventional 4-view mode that has roots in orthographic projection and descriptive geometry. CAD's multi-viewport--usually Axonometric and Multiview (e.g. top, front, side)--was the modernist extension of *Multiview* orthographic projection which played a crucial in architecture and engineering hence constructability of objects and spaces.

Eliminating the possibility of viewing and analyzing objects from different angles, from the programming point of view means to have a single camera. This fits well in SketchUp's case of reducing the architect to a single non-technical user with a primary perspective camera. A camera operates as an apparatus for the contemporary revival of Western anthropocentric representation.<sup>[21](#c21) </sup>A camera that constitutes an specific situatedness in SketchUp's dualistic space for us architect to navigate inside our constructions. A seductive self-centered process indeed, that by sustaining the user within the boundaries of its surface operations, it hinders the possibilities of many other worlds.

<br>
<hr>

#### c1
Here I refer to the new building assigned to the *University of the Arts Bremen* that is adjacent to the mentioned *Speicher X1*. Constructed by the landlord of the former it is named *Speicher XI A*.

#### c2
Here I refer to the idea of *Hauntology*, and specifically drawing on the concepts asserted by Mark Fisher who "argues that we are haunted by futures that failed to happen". See "Ghosts of My Life: Writings on Depression, Hauntology and Lost Futures", *goodread.com*. https://www.goodreads.com/en/book/show/20863042

#### c3
Here I draw on Allen's quote from John Summerson (as "the keenest observer of modern architecture" through its prominent architects from 1930s to 1960s): "Although Summerson found [modern architecture's] theories far from coherent, at their base was something quite different from _form_: They always referred to "some rhythmically repetitive pattern--whether it is a manufacturing process, the curriculum of a school, the domestic routine of a house, or simply the sense of repeated movement in a circulation system." (Summerson, 1957) See Allen Matthew, *Flowcharting: From Abstractionism to Algorithmics in Art and Architecture* (Zürich: gta Verlag, 2023) 13. https://doi.org/10.54872/gta/4616

#### c4
The construction that software was build on was translated directly to the material construction. If one could construct and calculate the curves or surfaces mathematically, then the fabrication would be possible.

#### c5
For more see "Professor Bézier: A short biography," in *Computer-Aided Design*, Vol. 22, Issue 9 (November 1990): 523. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-4485(90)90036-C

#### c6
James Pyfer, "Sketchpad" _Encyclopedia Britannica_, 28 June 2017. https://www.britannica.com/technology/Sketchpad

#### c7
From Sutherland's PhD thesis: “For drawings where motion of the drawing, or analysis of a drawn problem is of value to the user, Sketchpad excels. For highly repetitive drawings or drawings where accuracy is required, Sketchpad is sufficiently faster than conventional techniques to be worthwhile. For drawings which merely communicate with shops, it is probably better to use conventional paper and pencil.” (A Man-Machine Graphical Communication System, 1963) See David Weisberg, "Computer-Aided Design’s strong roots at MIT," *History of CAD*, 27 March 2023, https://www.shapr3d.com/history-of-cad/computer-aided-designs-strong-roots-at-mit

#### c8
"A three-dimensional design and modeling environment allows users to draw the outlines, or perimeters, of objects in a two-dimensional manner, similar to pencil and paper, already familiar to them. The two-dimensional, planar faces created by a user can then be pushed and pulled by editing tools within the environment to easily and intuitively model three-dimensional volumes and geometries." This invention patent's first assignment to *Google Inc.* was on Aug. 29, 2006. *Google LLC* and *Trimble Inc.* are assignees of this US patent until today, however, the document has expired in May 2021. See "Abstract" in *System and method for three-dimensional modeling*, Patent No. US6628279B1, Sep. 30, 2003. Accessed on *Google Patents* https://patents.google.com/patent/US6628279B1/en

#### c9
"[...] the invention provides an intuitive three-dimensional modeling environment, in part, by adopting an approach similar to the two-dimensional pen-and-paper drawing method that most people are familiar with." See "SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION" in *System and method for three-dimensional modeling* (SketchUp's Patent).

#### c10
"Even though several different approaches to modeling have been introduced over the years, many of which are very powerful, they traditionally have been difficult for design professionals to master. This is because they often require a technical /mathematical aptitude and an understanding of an extensive amount of tools, terminology and modeling paradigms that are unfamiliar to non-technical users." The preference of some sort of convenience over grasping complexities of tools which could lead to development of techniques and situated knowledge, is clear. Moreover, there is a praise for "creativity" by virtue of limited engagement: "[...] As a general rule, the quick, 'what if' types of modifications a designer would like to play with are very difficult, or awkward, to implement with most 3D applications. This stifles creativity because the user must devote a comparatively large amount of energy and time driving the technology as compared to focusing on the creative design task." See "BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION" in *System and method for three-dimensional modeling* (SketchUp's Patent).

#### c11
"The approaches being offered on the market today traditionally have steep learning curves that do not enable the casual or less-technical users to realize the advantages of 3D computer modeling. In addition, most 3D applications do not lend themselves to quick, non-precise modifications of the model that makes them poor conceptual design tools." See "BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION" in *System and method for three-dimensional modeling* (SketchUp's Patent). The efficient economic model behind rapid construction of building blocks, is hand in hand with SketchUp which was "easy to master". As an add-on to conventional drafting system, SketchUp encouraged the launch of other trivial game-like application called *Lumion*. Altogether presenting a mediocre and quick visualization package for architectural design, starting from rusty shop drawings to SketchUp and kitschy real-time rendering of Lumion (which contained hundreds of ready 3D models such as trees, plants, cars, "happy" humans, etc. to use for architectural rendering).

#### c12
Here I draw on the phrase "soft regime of software" by Metaheven, through which I refers to software's effortless constructions and navigation in contrast to physical manufacturing and territorial limitations: "Software does precisely what its name spells out: it softens the relationship between man and manufacture. Writing, visiting friends, searching, finding, saving: what once required at least some physical activity becomes extremely light, pleasant and effortless. Such a soft regime presents itself as unconstrained and plural. While it seems to cross all territorial boundaries, software rather functions as escapism and synchronizes employment and pleasure over, and against, labour and life. It is because software presents itself as a neutral matter, as a non-directed and infinite open space, that the question of access and circulation in such an infinite void of potentiality arises." (p. 16) See Metahaven, "White night before a manifesto," in *The Architect as Worker: Immaterial Labor, the Creative Class, and the Politics of Design*, ed. Peggy Deamer, (London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2015) 13-29.

#### c13
During the years we used SketchUp in architecture schools and firms in Turkey, the software shared a manifold of agencies with many architects in producing spaces of living that entailed a direct connection to the software's entrepreneurial constitution backed by multinational corporations interested in private ownership and neoliberalist agenda. An agenda that prioritizes popularity, dependency, and profitability over anything that could hinder its digital colonialism.

#### c14
SketchUp was being used on top of a CAD-based ecosystem that was required by constructors and consultants. Indeed, in the context I was studying and practicing, no one considered SketchUp as CAD software as it could never be used for plan, detail, and shop drawings. However, it is interesting to know that SketchUp was very compatible with scaling and lengths (referring to the “low-precise and conceptual tool” claim), it could get the model started based on _cleaned-up_ plans produced by the architects.   

#### c15
Here I draw on the term _regime_ to refer to such software/gig economy’s effect on “growing countries” such as Turkey. I also intend to refer to an aesthetic notion related to some software patents despite their abundance and sometimes out of charge. In this context, Kang mentions that aesthetical aspect to patents is not exactly "the recognition that a patent turns an invention (or knowledge) into a private or market commodity, which is the mainstream liberal critique of patent law". By referring to Guy Debord, Kang asserts that in this context "abstract ‘patent’ itself has become a commodity through its re-materialization into an image." See Hyo Yoon Kang "Patents as Capitalist Aesthetic Forms", _Law Critique_ (2023). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10978-023-09349-2

#### c16
On the connection between territory and surface: "Surface is not territory. Territory, which is actual and geographical (for that reason limited in supply), can be contested and may become the site of an actual conflict, a physical confrontation. This cannot happen on, or to, a surface. [...] Surface may be multiplied without encountering the physical limitations imposed by someone else’s terrain, opinion, presence or personality. " See Metahaven, "White night before a manifesto," 13.

#### c17
Mathematically abstracted Cartesian axis knows as X,Y,Z were color coded which I think rigidified the already limited spatiality. "Color-coded axis (red, green, blue) are used to indicate the X,Y, Z directions in 3D space. When constructing an edge, if drawn parallel to one of the primary axis, the edge will be displayed with the color of the parallel axis." See "Drawing Aids" in System and method for three-dimensional modeling (SketchUp's Patent).

#### c18
*NURBS* (Non-uniform rational B-spline) is a mathematical model used in computer graphics (CAD in particular) for representing curves and surfaces. It is a type of curve modeling, as opposed to polygonal modeling, which SketchUp holds on precariously. Many CAD software such as _Rhinoceros_ utilize this model which "offers great flexibility and precision for handling both analytic and modeled shapes". For more on NURBS see "What are NURBS?" *Rhino3d.com*, https://www.rhino3d.com/en/features/nurbs/ and "Non-uniform rational B-spline." *Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia*, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-uniform_rational_B-spline. Unlike SketchUp's imprudent and careless ideology, this model may require more complex mathematical calculations and computations, therefore, offering other modes of construction.

#### c19
"In order to make the invention more intuitive the software enables the user to simply define the edges of the desired form in 3D space to create a 3D surface model. The software recognizes when these edges form a closed planer shape and will construct, a two-dimensional “face” based upon and bounded by these edges. A 'face' can be thought of as the mathematical equivalent of skin filling the area between the defining edges. The edges can be drawn in any order or orientation. This basic ability to just draw the edges of the desired model is a process that is very similar to drawing with pen and paper and substantially reduces the learning curve." See "Create Edges in 3D Space to Form 3D Model" in *System and method for three-dimensional modeling* (SketchUp's Patent).

#### c20
Here another mundane analogy from the same patent: "Another aspect of the invention allows a designer to manipulate a model by pushing and pulling on faces of the model. Using the push/pull operation, a designer can extrude 2D geometry into 3D , change the size of existing 3D geometry, or introduce new faces to change the shape of existing 3D geometry." See **"Push/Pull"** in *System and method for three-dimensional modeling* (SketchUp's Patent).

#### c21
Drawing on Oscolari, I refer to the post-renascence export of perspective by Italian artists (initially Matteo Ricci) to non-western contexts (in Ricci's case to China). Ignoring their parallel projections drawings and descriptive rules (hence world view) they aimed to convince that "perspective was the right way to see and therefore to represent". See Massimo Oscolari, "The Jesuit Perspective in China." *Oblique drawing: a history of anti-perspective*, ( MIT Press 2012), 344.